
It seems likely that brain uploading will occur via [[in situ sequencing]] methods like [[fisseq]] combined with [[expansion microscopy]]. Also axonal tracing via [[lineage tracing]] techniques or other connectome data extraction. If we need even greater detail recovered from human brain, then possibly [[DNA nanoscopy]] could be used.

[[DNA ticker tape]] memory devices and intracellular protein ticker tape memory devices are also of high relevance to the question of brain uploading.

See [[fisseq]] for information about brain uploading.

See [[human brain reverse engineering]] for some other ideas.


[Automated scalable segmentation of neurons from multispectral images](https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.00388)

[Probabilistic fluorescence-based synapse detection](https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.05479)

[Stochastic single-molecule dynamics of synaptic membrane protein domains](https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.09536)

[Quantifying mesoscale neuroanatomy using X-ray microtomography](https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.03629)

[The demise of the synapse as the locus of memory: A looming paradigm shift?](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/10/24/082719)

---

[Connectome-seq: high-throughput mapping of neuronal connectivity at single-synapse resolution via barcode sequencing](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.02.13.638129v2.abstract)

"Connectome-seq relies on the labeling of synaptic connections using engineered protein-RNA complexes to translate a synapse into a pair of unique RNA barcodes. The intended outcome is that one barcode will be associated with the pre-synaptic neuron and the other with the post-synaptic neuron, allowing for later profiling via high-throughput sequencing."

"Two protein anchors, termed SynBar (synaptic barcoding), were designed: PreSynBar to target presynaptic terminals and PostSynBar to target postsynaptic sites. PreSynBar consists of a modified neurexin 1β protein fused to the large fragment of split-GFP (GFP1-10) and an RNA-binding domain, λN22 peptide, similar to other reported designs. PostSynBar is based on neuroligin 1, also fused to the complementary small fragment of split-GFP (GFP11) and the same RNA-binding domain."

"These trans-membrane protein constructs are designed to interact at synapses, reconstituting GFP and bringing together their associated RNA barcodes to anchor at the synaptic membranes. The protein scaffolds were largely adopted from the SynView constructs, where split-GFP fragments are embedded inside the synaptic proteins rather than at their N-terminals."

"Nuclei contain both cellular transcriptomes and copies of either PreRNA or PostRNA, allowing identification of cell types and their associated barcodes. During gentle brain tissue homogenization, the cell membranes connecting pre-synaptic terminals to axons and post-synaptic sites to dendrites are physically separated. The exposed membrane surfaces at both the pre- and post-synaptic compartments then reseal, forming structures called synaptosomes. Since PreSynBar and PostSynBar proteins are connected across the synaptic cleft, tightly bound to the associated RNA barcodes, these protein-RNA complexes should remain intact as long as the synaptic interface is preserved. This allows synaptosomes to maintain the paired PreRNA and PostRNA information from connected neurons, providing direct evidence of synaptic connections. By matching barcodes between nuclei and synaptosomes, we can link the identity of connected neurons and map their connectivity patterns."

"Workflow for parallel isolation of nuclei and synaptosomes. Following AAV injection into pre- and postsynaptic regions, brain tissue is processed through differential centrifugation. Slow spins yield crude pre- and post-nuclei, while a fast spin of the supernatant of the slow spin produces the synaptosome fraction."

processed about 20,000 synaptosomes/hour

See also [Network cloning using DNA barcodes](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6511037/) (Zador 2016/2019) and <https://gnusha.org/logs/2025-09-30.log> for an idea to reconstitute the biological topology from genomic data.


---

# Brain imaging

[[!inline  pagenames="brain_imaging"  raw="yes"]]

See also [[brain imaging]].


