
# Cloning companies

Cloning companies include:

* ViaGen Pets & Equine (dog, cat, horse) - acquired by Colossal
* Colossal (mammoth, endangered species generally)
* Trans Ova Genetics (cow, pig, sheep, goat, deer)
* Sooam Biotech Research Foundation (dog)
* Sinogene Biotechnology (dog, cat, horse)
* Kheiron Biotech (horse)
* Clonargen Biotech (horse)
* Avantea (horse, cow)
* Ovohorse / Ovoclone (horse)
* Replica Farm (horse)
* Cryozootech (horse)
* Fortgen (cow, sheep, goat)
* Crestview Genetics (horse)
* Boyalife/Sinica (dog, horse, cow)
* Jackson Labs / JAX (mice, rats?)
* Reproductive Biotechnology Centre (RBC) or Dubai’s Camel Reproduction Centre (CRC) (camel)
* R3 (some human cloning work but also [[whole body transplantation]])
* do the raelians count?? what about that weird 1970s book?


"In 2013, the The International Federation for Equestrian Sports (FEI) lifted the ban on cloned horses competing internationally following a review which found they were likely to have any advantage over horses bred traditionally."


"According to the Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, 42 of its 51 [82%] sniffer dogs were cloned from parent animals as of April, indicating such cloned detection dogs are already making important contributions to the country's quarantine activities. The number of cloned dogs first out-paced their naturally born counterparts in 2014, the agency said. Of the active cloned dogs, 39 are currently deployed at Incheon International Airport, South Korea, the country's main gateway... While the average cost of raising one detection dog is over 100 million won (US$108,816), it is less than half that when utilising cloned puppies, they said."

# Human cloning

for human cloning the current bottleneck is likely the imprinting control regions and methylation. For mice we have devised [[gene editing|gene-editing]] methods to switch the epigenetics or methylation at several important imprinting regions. Humans have at least 200 known imprinting control regions if not more. We also have evidence from imprinting disorders as to which ones are survivable but cause medically documented imprinting disorders. Or we can just do human cloning anyway and see what happens.

ethics of human cloning: it is more ethical to clone yourself than create a new genome from a mother and a father because a new genome means you are playing the genetic lottery on a new child. Genetic engineering to choose a genome is a little bit more ethical than completely rolling the dice, human cloning is more ethical than rolling hte device, and [[genetic modification|genetic-modifications]] plus cloning is probably even better. Of course, the best would be to run 1000 simultaneous gestations to get trajectories and pick the one that is healthiest and best [[brain development]] as-far-as-we-know. See [[artificial womb]].

Human cloning is especially useful for [[whole body transplantation]] (head transplantation) for the purposes of [[longevity]] or a source of compatible organ transplants.



See also [[in vitro fertilization]].
