<div id="intro" /><div id="introduction" />
# Transhumanism

Transhumanism is a personal philosophy of personal human enhancement. This
document offers applied individual effort (or hard work) as a critical missing
piece of the transhumanist puzzle.

People who work on transhumanist technology projects tend to do so because they
believe in directly applying existing technology towards transhumanist
technology projects that are either presently possible, near-term possible or
long-term possible.

Other definitions of trnashumanism often leave out the dirty details of how to
make technology. Generally, the future isn't going to create the technology and
then send everything to you. The alternative is to focus on transhumanist
engineering projects through engineering and other participation.

This document describes a general sense of transhumanism that is shared by the
participants of [[hplusroadmap]], an IRC channel that is focused on
transhumanist technology engineering projects.

<div id="tranhuman-tech" />
# Transhumanist technology

Transhumanism is the concept of engaging in the ongoing work and development of
certain technologies that enable further development. These technologies tend
to include:

* [genetic engineering](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synthetic_biology) or
synthetic biology

* [whole-brain emulation](http://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/reports/2008-3.pdf)

* computer architecture, wearable computers, mobile devices, supercomputing,
etc.

* [[nootropics]]

* nutrition and body building

* [life extension research](http://diyhpl.us/~bryan/papers2/longevity/)

* cryonics, cryopreservation, cryoresuscitation

* powered exoskeletons

* prosthetics

* neural implants

* [molecular nanotechnology](http://diyhpl.us/~bryan/papers2/nanotech/)

* [[self-replicating machines]]

* space colonization, habitats, mining, communication, transportation

* robots, mechanical automation

Transhumanist technology tends to include devices and methods that further
enable you to make modifications, augmentations and improvements. For example,
a nootropic that enables someone to build a better nootropic would be
considered transhumanist. This is also known as recursive self-improvement.

<div id="obvious" />
# Obvious statements

Transhumanists directly engage in learning and practicing:

* Programming. This is the best way to experience the most immediate gains in
transhumanist undertakings.

* Lab protocols for molecular biology, microbiology, genetic engineering
(synthetic biology), neurophysiology, computational neuroscience,
bioinformatics. See [[diybio]].

* Skills involving electronics, circuit design, chip architecture,
semiconductor/pcb manufacturing, and robotics.

* Machining with lathes, mills, laser cutters, CNC, and operating other machine
shop necessities.

* Biology is technology.

<div id="philosophy-open-source" />
# Software and hardware

Type words about open source software, open source hardware, free software,
technology licensing, etc.

<div id="proactionary-principle" />
# Proactionary Principle

The proactionary principle exists as a response to the precautionary principle,
a rule of thumb often used when deciding whether to allow the pursuit of a
technology that might have a negative consequence. In practice, the
precautionary principle is strongly biased against technological progress,
stating that "we should permit no new technology to be developed and no new
productive activity to take place unless we can scientifically prove that no
harm to health or environment will result."

Alternatively, the proactionary principle emphasizes technological progress and
our freedom to innovate and experiment, while also considering lost costs,
payoffs and negative effects. The burden of proof against developing a new
technology instead belongs to those who propose restrictive measures.

People's freedom to innovate technologically is highly valuable, even critical,
to humanity. This implies a range of responsibilities for those considering
whether and how to restrict new technologies. Assess risks
and opportunities using an objective, open, and comprehensive, yet simple
decision process based on science rather than collective emotional reactions.
Account for the costs of restrictions and lost opportunities as fully as direct
effects. Favor measures that are proportionate to the probability and magnitude
of impacts, and that have the highest payoff relative to their costs. Give a
high priority to people's freedom to learn, innovate, and advance.

[Read more..](http://www.maxmore.com/proactionary.html)

<div id="philoshopy-self-direction" />
# Self-directed actualization
([goals.yaml](../goals.yaml))

<code>[[!inline pages="goals.yaml" template="none" raw="yes"]]</code>


<div id="more-info" />
# More information

General biohacking questions can get the best support through the [diybio
mailing list](http://groups.google.com/group/diybio).

If you are interested in directly building transhumanist technology, please
contact us through the ##[hplusroadmap](http://diyhpl.us/wiki/hplusroadmap)
channel on irc.freenode.net, the longest-running transhumanist channel in
existence. The channel began as a roadmapping project for transhumanist
technology for figuring out which enabling technologies (that is, technology
that begets more transhumanist technology) to build. But really it's a
community of like-minded individuals that are working on and funding cool
projects.

<div id="groups" /><div id="meetups" />
In addition, you might be interested in finding individuals nearby or a place
to do work:

* [Biohacking groups](http://diyhpl.us/wiki/diybio/groups)

* [Hackerspaces](http://hackerspaces.org/wiki/List_of_Hacker_Spaces)

<div id="contributing" />
# Contributing

This document is version controlled by git. [Register to edit
here](http://diyhpl.us/piny-commands/newuser/) and [see other
commands](http://diyhpl.us/piny-commands/). You can also clone this wiki with
git and push changes back:

    git clone git://diyhpl.us/diyhpluswiki.git

Note to push changes you must push with your registered account:

    git push username@diyhpl.us:/srv/git/diyhpluswiki.git master

You can make this easier by updating the remotes:

    git remote set-url origin username@diyhpl.us:/srv/git/diyhpluswiki.git

Now "git push" should work without debilitating complaint.

[browse wiki history on cgit](http://diyhpl.us/cgit/diyhpluswiki)
