2021-10-27

Bryan Bishop

@kanzure 

Fertility rates are down. Multiple trends with enormous inertia feeding this. At this scale, it's difficult to bend the ark of human history. Won't change by informing, waiting for a better economy, or long plays to change culture. 

Hence, I propose the Human Gigafactory.

When you hear the term Human Gigafactory, for those who know me it probably conjures up images of artificial wombs and robots. But that's not what this is.

Fundamentally, the human gigafactory is the mindset and the commitment to make more people, AT SCALE, and thereby change the course of humanity away from obliteration. Trust me, 8 billion current humans in the scheme of the cosmos is astronomically ZERO. Nada. Zilch.

We can simply choose to not extinguish ourselves. We can work hard, extremely hard, to make more people.

That's the core idea. No, it's not artificial wombs and baby incubators and robots. What's more important is making a firm commitment to solve the problem, and not leaving our access to destiny up to chance or vague hopes about large scale cultural course correction (which likely won't work anyway).

What we need is a vision-- imagine a human gigafactory-- a venture with a mission to make 1 million new human beings within 10 or 15 years. With scaling, we can plan for a billion new people. With some effort, we can scale human civilization to the rest of the solar system and become a TRILLION people strong. Even "mere" millions vastly expands the scale and scope of human progress.

It's completely possible. This is not a question of physics. There are no fundamental reasons we cannot build or achieve this.

I'm running out of time here to keep your attention. I'll be brief. It's real families with loving moms and dads. Real kids. Gigafactory ought to be pro-freedom, pro-human, individuality and sovereign choice, voluntary, & absolutely never coercive.

I'm certain many share these values with me.

Other far greater minds have been thinking about the unfolding humanoid fertility disaster, and it's time for real solutions. What's been missing is an engineering approach to scale the Human Species Project.

If you're serious about solving this problem, and you believe in engineering and the human spirit to solve any challenge, get in touch. There's lots more going into this.

Thank you.
