# About the diyhpl.us wiki

The [[diyhpl.us wiki (diyhpluswiki)|hplusroadmap]] is a wiki for open source hardware, do-it-yourself biohacking and practical human enhancement engineering projects which could be called transhumanism. The engineering teams behind this wiki can be found in the [[hplusroadmap]] IRC channel ([logs](http://gnusha.org/logs/)). Our projects are self-funded by the diyhpl.us group and community.

The domain name "diyhpl.us" comes from "do-it-yourself human enhancement" or "plus". The domain name "diyhpl.us" (diyhplus) hosts the diyhplus wiki (diyhpluswiki) which covers topics such as human enhancement, genetic engineering, germline genetic engineering, gene therapy, cell therapy, human enhancement, intelligence enhancement, open-source hardware, [[molecular nanotechnology|nanotech]], kinematic [[self-replicating machines]], do-it-yourself biology, synthetic biology, [[longevity]], [[nootropics]], molecular nanotechnology, evolutionary algorithms for applied molecular evolution, etc.

Most of this wiki is an attempt to summarize the interesting developments and techniques from publicly available [[hplusroadmap]] IRC chat logs since 2008.

<a name="interesting" />
# Interesting pages

* [[Potential human enhancements via human embryo germline genetic engineering|genetic-modifications]] is the diyhpluswiki's long-running 13+ year living document of potential human embryo germline modifications. The proposed and documented human embryo engineering enhancements include upgrades for [[longevity]], intelligence, learning, memory, [[sleep]], disease resistance, future proofing, immune system upgrades, and many other speculative subjects. It's a combination of direct genetic engineering interventions (such as upregulation, overexpression, knock-in, knock-out, etc), genome-wide association studies (GWAS) mutational hints, human studies, familial studies, transgenic mice studies, transgenic rat studies, and other sources of knowledge. The goal is to provide a roadmap for embryo engineering and embryo technology development. At this point, the diyhplus [[human embryo engineering wish list|genetic-modifications]] is the largest list of potential human enhancements on the web.
  * See also [[the designer baby FAQ|designer-baby-faq]]. Read more about [[our human embryo engineering platform|germline-genetic-engineering-technology]].
* [[Oligonucleotide synthesis chemistry|dna/synthesis/notes]] - an overview of the chemistry of making DNA molecules from scratch, including manual by-hand pipetting to synthesize synthetic DNA molecules.
* [[Direct electronic and/or optical control of enzymatic DNA synthesis|polymerase/notes]] - a long-term quest for exceptionally fast, long and cheap DNA synthesis using enzymatic molecular machines to make custom DNA molecules.
* [[Intelligence enhancement|nootropics]] - unusual ideas for creating unusually high intelligence
* [[longevity and anti-aging|longevity]] - how might we use genetic engineering (or other interventions) to increase human lifespan to a few hundred or thousand years?

Other pages:

* [[What is hplusroadmap?|hplusroadmap]]
* [[Proposed human embryo genetic upgrades|genetic-modifications]]
* [[gene editing|gene-editing]] - various gene therapy tools and mechanisms
* [[gene therapy|gene-therapy]] - information about approaches for gene therapy
* [[cell therapy]] - information about approaches to cell therapy
- [[Human cloning and non-human cloning|cloning]]
* [[protein engineering]] - protein folding and protein engineering wish list
* [[nutrition]] - unbreaking human metabolism
* [[Methods for human brain uploading|brain_uploading]]
* [[Human gigafactory plan|human-gigafactory]] - the human gigafactory is a plan for making more humans at scale using large-scale engineering to grow billions of new humans.
* [[Conference transcripts|transcripts]] - mostly handwritten transcripts from bryan's adventures in live word-for-word notetaking at conferences, now mostly migrated to [btctranscripts.com](https://btctranscripts.com/) but on this wiki there is also substantial non-bitcoin related transcripts such as in the fields of synthetic biology, brain uploading, protein engineering, etc.
* [[various old DNA project ideas|dna/projects]] - what can you do with DNA synthesis?
* [[DIYbio FAQ|diybio/faq]] - this is a basic FAQ on do-it-yourself biohacking
* [[DIYbio group list|diybio/groups]] - an old list of do-it-yourself biology (DIYbio) community groups in different cities.
* a [laser_etcher for microfluidics](http://diyhpl.us/laser_etcher/) project (see [cgit](http://diyhpl.us/cgit/laser_etcher)).

<a name="index" />
# Index of pages

[[!map pages="* and ! */* and ! ikiwiki and ! favicon.ico and ! *.css and ! shortcuts and ! sandbox and ! templates and ! recentchanges"]]

<a name="editing" />
# Editing this wiki

Submit a pull request on github: <https://github.com/kanzure/diyhpluswiki>

[Register to edit here](http://diyhpl.us/piny-commands/newuser/) and [see other commands](http://diyhpl.us/piny-commands/). You can also clone this wiki with git and push changes back:

    git clone git://diyhpl.us/diyhpluswiki.git

Note to push changes you must push with your registered account:

    git push username@diyhpl.us:/srv/git/diyhpluswiki.git master

You can make this easier by updating the remotes:

    git remote set-url origin username@diyhpl.us:/srv/git/diyhpluswiki.git

Now "git push" should work without debilitating complaint.

[browse wiki history on cgit](http://diyhpl.us/cgit/diyhpluswiki)

[[!inline  pagenames="hplusroadmap"  raw="yes"]]
