# Nootropics

"nootropics" are drugs that make you smart or smarter. It is not necessarily a drug. Nootropics are defined as substances or technologies that have neurotrophic or beneficial cognitive effect, whether it improves learning, memory, [[intelligence]], or other cognitive phenomena.

The problem with nootropics is that they are not particularly effective so far. Can we make better smart drugs? Nicotine, dextroamphetamine, and a few others have non-zero impact but the results are not yet congruent with fantasy.

# Recursive nootropics

Or "the minimum viable nootropic": a nootropic that makes you smart enough to design a better nootropic.

A "_recursive_ nootropic" would be a nootropic that someone could take and then they subsequently design an even more powerful nootropic that further increases human intelligence or performance. This might sound similar to Aubrey de Grey's "longevity escape velocity" except it's more like "intelligence escape velocity" or the transhumanist concept of "recursive self-improvement".

[[!inline  pagenames="nootropics/microbes"  raw="yes"]]

# Alternative approaches to intelligence enhancement

Other than small molecule supplements, [[cell therapy]], or even [[gene therapy|gene-therapy]], there may be [[surgical options for intelligence enhancement|neurosurgery]] that could be developed with concerted effort.

normobaric oxygen supplementation has been shown to improve scores on psychometric tests.

intracortical injection, infusion or perfusion has been shown to improve certain brain functions. Some of these "direct injection" approaches are on the [[germline genetic modifications page|genetic-modifications]].

injection of neuronal stem cells or other cell therapies into the brain has been shown to improve memory and learning performance in animal models. Likewise, more recent studies have shown that cortical organoids can be transplanted into animal brains and these animals then go on to show an improvement in learning or memory.

brain-computer interfaces can provide neurotrophic and nootropic effects. The "cognitive pacemaker" concept has been implemented in several research projects and shows, at minimum, an improvement in working memory capacity in aged humanoid adults.

# SETI: Search for Exceptional Terrestrial Intelligence

Here I propose a Search for Exceptional Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI) in homage to the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI). This would be a large-scale search for unusual familial cognitive phenotypes related to intelligence, learning, memory, sleep, mathematic ability, reading comprehension, or other cognitive phenotypes of interest. The concept is that there are possibly monogenic changes with single mutations, or a small collection of mutations, or other modifications (such as chromosomal deletions, gain of function, loss of function, copy number variations, etc) that might have a surprisingly strong impact on cognitive phenotype.

# Rant about the polygenic trait religion

rant moved to [[polygenics]].

# links

[longecity nootropics subforum](http://www.longecity.org/forum/forum/169-brain-health/)

# Other pages

[[!map pages="nootropics/* and ! nootropics/*/*"]]
