'''DIYbio FAQ v1.0'''

There have been many amazingly useful discussions on the mailing list, but unfortunately we collectively forget what we have talked about because we haven't yet assembled a FAQ to give to new members. Where can they possibly buy supplies? Where can they read up on [http://protocol-online.org/ protocols]? What books have been recommended to DIYbio amateurs in the past? And so on. There is a lot of good information. So, how can you help this FAQ? The biggest thing at the moment would be to go through the [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio mailing list] and find three of the most insightful and useful topics that you've seen there. It's okay if you started it, or if you were the one who started asking the question, as it's probably something valuable, and just add it to the bottom of the page, or try to fit it into a category or question that others probably have. This way, we can begin to build up this document to a somewhat reasonable state.

= What is DIYbio, as an organization? =
DIYbio is an organization that aims to help make biology a worthwhile pursuit for citizen scientists, amateur biologists, and DIY biological engineers who value openness and safety. This will require mechanisms for amateurs to increase their knowledge and skills, access to a community of experts, the development of a code of ethics, responsible oversight, and leadership on issues that are unique to doing biology outside of traditional professional settings.

= Do you recommend any books, guides, periodicals, journals, feeds, sites, blogs, wikis, instructables, .. ? =

= What equipment is in a basic biology lab? =
.. and how can I make it?


Would you like to contribute to an answer for this question? Run around a lab that you have access to and document all of the equipment that you see, or remember, etc. It's ok if some of the equipment is ridiculous (like 100k+ RPM centrifuges), because we can filter that out later and reduce the lists down to equipment in a basic biology lab.

= What equipment do I need to perform experiment XYZ? =
Just run it through the handy "checktools" program.

= Has DIYbio been in the news? =
Yes.

* 2009-03-18: [http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2009/mar/19/biohacking-genetics-research The Geneticist in the Garage]
* 2009-01-19: [http://www.wired.com/medtech/genetics/magazine/17-02/ff_diygenetics?currentPage=all DIY DNA: One Father's Attempt to Hack His Daughter's Genetic Code]
* 2009-01-07: [http://www.newscientist.com/article/mg20126881.400-genetic-manpulation-now-becoming-a-hobby.html?full=true&print=true Rise of the garage genome hackers]
* 2008-12-30: [http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/science/july-dec08/diybio_12-30.html Students, Scientists Build Biological Machines (transcript)] (Lehrer on PBS) ([http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-IIWH6Hhcnc video])
* 2008-12-25: [http://iht.nytimes.com/articles/ap/2008/12/25/america/Do-It-Yourself-DNA.php Amateurs are trying genetic engineering at home] ([http://science.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=08/12/25/1833211 Slashdot])
* 2008-12-18: [http://www.publico.es/ciencias/184626/biohackers/reventar/reinventar/biologia/garajes Público: Biohackers: reventar y reinventar la biología desde los garajes]
* 2008-12-11: [http://seedmagazine.com/news/2008/12/the_biohacking_hobbyist.php The Biohacking Hobbyist]
* 2008-09-15: [http://www.boston.com/news/science/articles/2008/09/15/accessible_science/ Hackers aim to make biology household practice]
* many, many other occurences- keep sending them in
** also, there have been many news stories from the pre-DIYbio era which should be in this list


<youtube>-IIWH6Hhcnc</youtube>

= How can I get involved? =
Many ways! Here's a brief overview:
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio mailing list] (most activity)
* IRC (#diybio on irc.freenode.net)
* local groups

So far, we mainly communicate through the [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio mailing list], which is where the majority of people are listening in on the conversations and discussions. Since the volume of discussion can be extreme, there is also a very low volume [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio-announce DIYbio announce] mailing list, which occassionally has announcements that the community might be interested in. Also, there are groups for [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio-SF San Francisco], [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio-chicago Chicago], [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio-nyc New York] (city), [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio-london London], and [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio-boston Boston].

You're welcome to show up on the mailing list- in fact, we encourage it. Just be sure to follow [http://www.netmeister.org/news/learn2quote.html conventional netiquette] rules. Historically, the main DIYbio mailing list hasn't really set its foot down regarding top versus bottom posting (or even side posting or diagonal posting), but please do be kind and trim your replies. Reading about [http://www.netmeister.org/news/learn2quote.html netiquette] wouldn't be a bad idea.

= Is there a group in my area? =
There's probably something nearby- maybe at least somebody somewhat interested in getting together for lunch or maybe sitting down over a bench and doing serious experiments- at any rate, you can find out about those near you by [http://diybio.org/local/ looking over this map].

= Where can I see an archive of previous DIYbio discussions and questions? =
Right over [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio here].

= Legal issues =
Are hereby resolved. Other lawyer-talk here.

= What's all this about "open", anyway? =
[http://groups.google.com/group/openmanufacturing/tree/browse_frm/thread/fdb204fc92346e1b?hide_quotes=no#msg_eb6f86ff068e3764 What's all this about "open", anyway?]

= Microfluidics MiniFAQ =
See also: [[Microfluidics]]; [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/1197606e3c3dc439 the original sharpie microfluidics post to diybio]; [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/browse_frm/thread/b3bb2d8b8a654fd4/1197606e3c3dc439?#1197606e3c3dc439 the rest of the thread].


The following is a run of the example microfluidics T-junction simulation in elmer, an open source CFD/FEM/FEA package. What you see here is the progression of an analyte due to electro-osmotic flow. There are two electric fields, three boundary conditions and a lot of wasted hours playing around with ElmerGUI and ElmerFront.

<youtube>sPY84NelFO4</youtube>


== What is microfluidics? ==
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microfluidics Wikipedia sez]: Microfluidics deals with the behavior, precise control and manipulation of fluids that are geometrically constrained to a small, typically sub-millimeter, scale. Typically, micro means one of the following features: small volumes(nl, pl, fl); small size; low energy consumption; effects of the micro domain (i.e., [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laminar_flow laminar flows], [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_tension surface tension], [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffusion diffusion], Marangoli forces, capillary forces, ...).

== What is a lab on a chip (LOC)? ==
A '''lab-on-a-chip (LOC)''' is a device that integrates one or several laboratory functions on a single chip of only millimeters to a few square centimeters in size. LOCs deal with the handling of extremely small fluid volumes down to less than pico liters. Lab-on-a-chip devices are a subset of MEMS devices and often indicated by "'''Micro Total Analysis Systems'''" ('''µTAS''') as well. Microfluidics is a broader term that describes also mechanical flow control devices like pumps and valves or sensors like flowmeters and viscometers. However, strictly regarded "Lab-on-a-Chip" indicates '''generally the scaling of single or multiple lab processes down to chip-format''', whereas "µTAS" is dedicated to the integration of the total sequence of lab processes to perform chemical analysis. The term "Lab-on-a-Chip" was introduced later on when it turned out that µTAS technologies were more widely applicable than only for analysis purposes.


Ultimately the idea is to have all of the typical components, procedures and processes of a laboratory available on a "chip", on a single perhaps disposable device, rather than having to build or purchase bulky equipment that sometimes tends to be hard to acquire or learn about.
