{{DIYbio:Top}}
This topic ''Equipment and Consumables'' is part of the 
[http://openwetware.org/wiki/DIYbio/FAQ DIYBio FAQ] 

: Please '''update this FAQ mercilessly with Q&A !'''



= What equipment do I need to perform DIYBio-related projects? =

* Basic biology equipment (see [http://adl.serveftp.org/skdb/doc/BOMs/pcr here] for PCR equipment, however much of the equipment isn't actually required)
** or generic tools used in other projects, just use it for biology (see MacGyverisms below)
* Basic computer equipment
* Perhaps some open source software development tools

== What equipment do I need to preserve my microbes? ==

* Feed the microbes.  For e. coli, use [http://openwetware.org/wiki/Wittrup:_E._coli_Media E. coli Media] or similar.

* Freeze the microbes at low temperature storage, as below.

** The general rule is the cells lose 1/3 to 1/2 competency (for transformation) each freeze-thaw cycle.  

<pre>
On Oct 3, 9:42 am, Tom Randall <tarand...@gmail.com> wrote:
> On Oct 2, 4:59 pm, Ben Gadoua <ben.gad...@gmail.com> wrote:
> 
> >   E. coli is best snap frozen in LN2 but it keeps at -20C or -80C for years
> > and years, best to keep it at -20C instead of 4C because at 4C e. coli is
> > still slowly growning.
> 
> > Ben
> 
> -20C is fine. In any ordinary (manual-defrost) freezer. I recently revived some E. coli
> strains from a previous lab that I had simply stored in my kitchen
> refrigerator (freezer compartment of course, next to frozen OJ et al.)
> for 6+ yrs frozen in 50% glycerol/LB. Those with plasmids still grew
> up with amp selection and plasmid preps produced the right plasmid.
> Have since restocked, again in 50% glycerol/LB in a dedicated -20C
> freezer this time, again off the shelf, used, approx 6 cu non frost
> free freezer for stocks and enzymes. One reason for using E. coli K12
> even if not your final organism of interest, is that it is easy to
> maintain without much specialized storage. Maintaining competent cells
> is likely a more difficult proposition and unless you are willing to
> go the -70C route you will likely have to live with a shorter shelf
> life and some loss of transformation efficiency over time.
</pre>
:: -- Ben Gadoua and Tom Randall on the DIYbio google group.

<pre>
On Oct 2, 3:58 am, Cathal Garvey <cathalgar...@gmail.com> wrote:
> A note on unfreezing stock cells; try not to!
> 
> If you have cells frozen in glycerol/media, try to scrape a tiny bit off the
> surface, and use that to start a new culture. Put the rest right back in the
> freezer. The reason being, cells don't survive repeated freeze/thaw cycles
> very well at all. Best to keep them frozen all the time, and only thaw the
> tiny bits you scrape off the top.
</pre>
:: -- Cathal Garvey on the DIYbio google group.

<pre>


On Oct 1, 7:38 pm, Ben Gadoua <ben.gad...@gmail.com> wrote:
>   Most labs that I've seen keep some frozen stock of the basic e. coli with
> no transformation, frozen either as a stab culture or with DMSA/glycol mixed
> into the media+e. coli. After that labs unfreeze part of the e. coli
> culture, or take some, on the the tip of a pipetter and dilute it into your
> plasmid, do your heatshock or electroporation, and then add rich culture
> media and let it mature in a shaker incubator for around an hour, we aren't
> looking for confluency here, we just want the bacteria to be more
> concentrated, an hour or so is about 3 doublings, so however much bacteria
> we started with has now been multiplied by 8. (In rich media at optimal
> temperature with good aeration, e. coli doubles every 20 minutes) Then you
> do as Bryan alluded to, a streak plate, you could also do two plates, one
> with 90% of the culture spread out over the surface and another with 10% of
> the culture spread out over the surface. Both methods are valid, but if you
> have a very high concentration of culture, IE. you forgot about your bullet
> prep and left it for 4 hours, a streak plate may be better because it lets
> you dilute your culture 8-32 fold depending on how many times you streak.
> The plates that you'll use for your streaking will have an antibiotic in
> them that kills all of the bacteria that you hadn't transformed, because the
> plasmid that you put into the bacteria will have had an antibiotic
> resistence. Another reason for this antibiotic resistance is that any of the
> other stray bacteria that may have gotten into your culture the times that
> is was open will also be killed.
> 
>  So there you have it, e. coli culture in a nutshell.
> 
> Ben
</pre>
:: -- Ben Gadoua on the DIYbio google group.

<pre>


On Oct 3, 3:54 pm, Cory Tobin <cory.to...@gmail.com> wrote:
> Regarding freezers: any ordinary freezer will probably be fine for
> keeping bacteria frozen for a few months.  But keep in mind most
> freezers in people's kitchens are auto-defrosting, meaning they
> occasionally raise the temperature to melt the ice.  If you are going
> to purchase a freezer specifically for biology, I would recommend
> getting a manual-defrost freezer.  It will probably be cheaper than an
> auto-defroster anyways.
> 
> -Cory
</pre>
:: -- Cory Tobin on the DIYbio google group.

== What equipment is in a basic biology lab ==


* ''A note to readers.. please add more answer to this question''

* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/browse_frm/thread/b014b25110c9922c/e9a22564708172df?#e9a22564708172df Using ebay to set up a molecular bio lab for less than $1k USD] (see also [http://www.boingboing.net/2009/04/09/howto-set-up-a-molec.html] and [http://scienceblogs.com/worldsfair/2009/04/using_ebay_to_set_up_a_molecul.php])

== Where can I find auctions for biotech? ==

See [http://openwetware.org/wiki/DIYbio/FAQ DIYBio FAQ Main Page, Appendix 2, List of Equipment Suppliers]

= What Equipment can I build myself ? =

See [http://openwetware.org/wiki/DIYbio/FAQ/Projects DIYBio FAQ: Projects] for a growing list of equipment to build right now.

* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/048ce958697fe6ba Cheap technology for biology]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/a07ba5d01c61aa09 CO-2 rich environment in a ziplock baggie]
* gel electrophoresis in a straw (keiki gels)
** [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/browse_frm/thread/c77e9e5290e57383/4ab47e86c1eecc56?#4ab47e86c1eecc56 Keiki gels: Gel electrophoreis in a straw]; described by [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/03a955483651a05c one of the original 'idea posts'].  [http://openwetware.org/wiki/DIYbio:Notebook/Keiki_Gels very basic protocol] which was featured on [http://www.boingboing.net/2009/02/06/crowdsourced-science.html boingboing].
* inkjet, laser printer, wax, ice-lithography, sharpie, or other forms of diy microfluidics
* [http://www.instructables.com/id/5_minute_DNA_Extraction_in_a_Shot_Glass/ 5 minute DNA extraction in a shot glass]

== How can I make a spectrophotometer? ==

See [http://openwetware.org/wiki/DIYbio/FAQ/Projects DIYBio FAQ: Projects]

== How can I make an atomic force microscope (AFM)? ==
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/browse_thread/thread/e3ea9182fe618a71 How to use plastic printed parts to do a DIY AFM]
* AFM != STM

== How can I make a sterile environment? ==

=== Using Ultraviolet (UV) for sterilization ===

Here is a [http://www.uvp.com/pdf/ab-115.pdf table of how much UV exposure it takes to kill various organisms and bacteria]. Note units are in microwatt-seconds per cm2. Specs for UV lamps usually give emission as microwatts per cm2 measured at a distance of 1 m from the lamp.

Do not leave UV lamps on for long periods of time because the bulbs "wear out".  Specifically, the amount of UV produced will decrease over time (see manufacturer spec sheets).  With extended use, it may seem that the bulb is creating a sterile environment when actually it is not producing enough UV.

Warning:  UV spectrum of sterilization bulbs are bad for you.  Do not expose yourself to the UV.  If you build a UV "hood", add a switch which always turns the light off when the door is opened.

= What Equipment have other DIYBio members made? Can I buy one from them? Where are the plans? =

See [http://openwetware.org/wiki/DIYbio/FAQ/Projects DIYBio FAQ: Projects]

= How can I cheaply substitute, reuse, recycle, sterilize, or "refresh" equipment? =

== Reusing Electroporation Cuvettes ==


""If you have ever worked out the price of an electroporation cuvette
you will realise that, at several dollars each, they are worth
recycling. Accounts on how amenable electroporation cuvettes are to recycling
vary, but I find that as long as you treat them well it is possible to
use single cuvette many times. [...] "" See
http://bitesizebio.com/2008/04/30/re-cycling-electroporation-cuvettes/


== Reusing Spin Columns ==


  To reuse the Qiagen columns:
  I've been working with an [[iGEM]] team operating on the cheap this year
  and found the openwetware buffer solutions to work just great. Here is
  the protocol on renewing the spin columns:
  - soak column 24-48 hr in 1M HCl - try make sure no air bubbles at
  filter surface
  - store in acid to inhibit contamination - say 0.1M HCl
  - before use, rinse and reequilibrate
    - 3-5x 0.75mL dH2O spin thru, discard
    - 1x 0.75mL PE spin thru, discard and spin again
   See BioTechniques 42:186-192 (February 2007)

:: -- Derek, on the DIYbio google group

== Substituting Spin Columns ==

    Epoch Biolabs spin columns compared to Qiagen spin columns
    Epoch Biolabs Spin columns, (http://www.epochbiolabs.com/minispin.asp)
    I got a free sample of item # 1910-250 (around 10 sent).
     
    Grew 2 ml cultures of E coli containing either pUC18 or pBlueScript SK
    + overnight at 37C (LB with 50 ug/ml amp).
    Used 1 ml of each plasmid culture and prepped plasmid DNA with either
    Qiagen (Cat #27104 Qiaprep spin miniprep kit) or Epoch spin columns.
    Did both using Qiagen supplied buffers using the same protocol.
    From the final prep of 50 ul DNA I used 10 ul of plasmid DNA (~500 ng)
    for an EcoRI digest, ran on a 0.7% agarose gel and, again by eye, not
    true quantitation,
    both spin columns seem absolutely equivalent.
     
    Again, Epoch is much cheaper, Qiaprep kit is $81 with 50 columns, I
    have already purchased their basic offering of 250 columns for $95,
    should last forever if I recycle them. One does have to make your own
    buffer, Epoch does not supply, so one would have to factor in the cost
    of the chemicals you need to buy, but over the long term this will
    also be a savings.
    This was sent to my residence, which was good.
    The only odd thing about their ordering process is they want a Tax ID,
    which I do have since I set up as a non-profit in 2003. Dont know if
    you can get around this or not if you order by phone.
:: -- Tom (tarandall) on DIYbio google group

= Chemicals and Reagents are expensive.  How can I make my own?  What can I substitute? =

== Taq ==

    Sibgene Taq.
    This can be purchased and home delivered from http://www.sibgene.com/
    They deliver Taq at room temp, which is odd.
     
    I tested PCR amplification of two plasmid templates so far (more
    complex DNA sources need to be examined also)
    pUC19 (NEB #N3041S)
    pGREEN (Carolina Biologicals)
    no DNA control used in all tests.
     
    using 10 ng of each plasmid in all assays with primers amplifying a
    region of the ampicillin resistance marker
    ampF GTTACCAATGCTTAATCAGTGAGGC
    ampR ATGAGTATTCAACATTTCCGTGTCGC
    primers from www.idt.com
     
     
    Basic rxn contains (in 50ul):
    10 ng DNA
    1X Supplier buffer
    0.2 mM dNTPs (Promega Cat#201912)
    1 ug ampF
    1 ug ampR
    0.25 ul Taq (all supplied at 5U/ul)
    H2O to 50 ul
     
    Using the following conditions:
    94C, 4 min
    followed by 30 cycles of:
    94C, 1 min
    55C, 2 min
    72C, 2 min
    Using a Perkin Elmer DNA Thermocycler 480 (one of the older models I
    bought several yrs ago on ebay, works good as new).
     
    10 ul of each rxn were run on an 0.7% agarose gel and stained with
    EtBr.
    Pictures are not attached as I dont know how to do that on this forum
    and I am horrible at taking good UV transilluminator pictures with
    a digital camera (any hints would be appreciated).
     
    A single PCR product of appropriate sized was obtained in all assays.
    In the originally supplied buffers, NEB and Promega Taq performed
    better than Sibgene Taq (about 2X more product) with each DNA
    template, not very quantitative, this is a simple PCR assay. Sibgene
    Taq performs equally well as NEB Taq when used in the NEB supplied
    buffer, while the NEB Taq performance falls off
    when it is used with the Sibgene supplied buffer.
     
    My conclusion is that Sibgene Taq is equivalent to the other two
    commercial sources tested and the limitation of the Sibgene Taq is the
    buffer they supply.
     
    Considering cost per unit, I would (and will) buy more Sibgene Taq but
    make sure I have plenty of NEB ThermoPol buffer around.
    Sibgene 1000U for $56
    NEB Taq 400U for $52 (not including shipping)
    Promega GoTaq 100U for $28 (not including shipping)
:: -- Tom (tarandall) on DIYbio google group




== Substitutes for Agarose ==

* Some opinions state Agar is too expensive and alternatives exist.
* It is possible to use substitutes for Agarose depending on the experiment and the need for precision in the result.

:"Agarose seems expensive (500g for $300) however this makes almost 25 litres of 2% solution, enough for approx. 1000 gels. 30 cents a gel ain't that bad compared to precast costs."  
::-- Ben Gadoua on DIYbio google group



=== Using Agar instead of Agarose ===

:"We have recently attempted to find an inexpensive alternative to agarose  for analytical purposes. We observed that agar is an adequate support medium for gel electrophoresis (Fig 1).  [...] These included Difco Bacto-Agar (Detroit, U.S.A.), Merck Agar-Agar (Darmstadt, Germany), Oxoid agar (London, UK.), Biolab Agar (Halfway House, R.S.A.), Bitek Agar (Detroit, U.S.A.) and bulk agar obtained from New Zealand. All these agar formulations gave good separation of our DNA  ... Conclusion: ... agar can be used as a gel matrix in place of agarose in many instances. We do not recommend using agar if the DNA is to be purified from a gel. We have attempted experiments involving the southern blotting technique using agar as our gel matrix. Our results were, however, unsatisfactory. We therefore recommend that agar gels can be used as a cheap altelnative to agarose to check the purity, size and amount of DNA in a sample."
:: From: AGAR, AN ALTERNATIVE TO AGAROSE IN ANALYTICAL GEL ELECTROPHORESIS, BIOTECHNOLOGY TECH, CD. Viljoen, B.D. Wingfield* and M.J. Wingfield Volume 7 No.10 (October 1993) pp723-726. DOI:10.1007/BF00152620

:"The other option is to wash with two changes of EDTA (think it was 25mM) to remove divalent metals and sulfonated (non-gelling) agar. There is also a process based on alcohol washes - but can't find my reference to it." 
::-- Abizar on DIYBio google group

:"Most agar has a lot of positively charged groups on it that interfere with electorphoresis if DNA. That's why we use agarose, which is either derived from a source very low in these groups or chemically modified. I worked for a DNA fingerprinting company and had to lead a troubleshooting team once to find out why our DNA bands were all smeary on gels- turned out our agarose supplier had switched where they sourced their agarose from, and it was too full of sulfhydryl groups to run the large slab gels well (although apparently it was OK for smaller gels with shorter DNA fragments). Agar is normally much worse, since they don't expect anyone to use it for gels.  Acrylamide is toxic until it polymerizes. You can buy precast gels to minimize your risk, but they are expensive."  
::-- EJ on DIYbio google group

:" As a suggestion, if you're  using Agar instead of Agarose, you can prerun it for maybe half an hour to try and get rid of many of the positive contaminants. You could also wash the agar in alcohol and then in ketone to try and get some of the impurities out. You'll have to try it and see, there's no other  way to tell, if you want to use agar you might want to use smaller dna fragments, they run better on less pure gels. "  
::-- Ben Gadoua on DIYbio google group


    agar-agar
    Went to local Asian Store and bought a quantity of Telephone brand
    agar-agar. ($1.59/25 g packet)
     
    Visually it appeared significantly more pure than bacto agar, similar
    to washed agar, a very fine powder. Worked well at 1% whereas bacto-
    agar usually needs 1.5-2% concentration in plates, likely can use at
    conc. lower than 1%.
    Tested growth of pUC18 and pBSSK+ containing E coli strains on LB amp
    and LB amp+xgal+IPTG (all at standard concentrations) and in all cases
    growth under amp selection was equal between bacto-agar and agar-agar
    and lacZ complementation resulting in blue color was as good as with
    bacto agar.
    Tested the ability of agar-agar to test auxotrophic mutations (limited
    test with two auxotrophies, commonly used his-3 (histidine) and inl
    (inositol) strains of Neurospora crassa and in each case
    auxotrophic strains would not grow on minimal media without
    appropriate supplements, which suggested to me with this limited
    testing that the agar-agar was pretty pure (no his or inl in the agar
    at least).
    So, at ~$33 for 500 g of agar-agar, about 1/10 cost of bacto agar, I
    intend to use this as long as I can buy it.
:: -- Tom (tarandall) on DIYbio google group

=== Using Other Substitutes for Agarose ===

:Table lists starches & flours:
:: [http://heybryan.org/books/papers/graph1_alternate_agar_formula.png Table: Alternate to Agar]

:"Silica gel is another possible solidifying agent.  Likely totally inert, and stable at high temperatures for thermophiles. "  
::-- Tom Knight, diybio google group

:"None of those (in the 'starches & flours' table) work (well).  Agar is clear and indigestable by bacteria, none of those replacements have those properties. Guar gum is the only substitue worth trying, but from what I understand it's a LOT harder to work with.  For the price of food grade agar it just isn't worth trying to save money.  Food grade works great for everything I've tried and you can get it pretty dang cheap online." 
::-- Jake, diybio google group


=== How do you purify agar? ===

:"here is a good washed agar protocol, cleans up contaminants. It involves acetone, easy to find at home depot, but dont be smoking. Also the washed agar will gel at a lower concentration, 1% instead of 1.5% or 2%. As store bought stuff is less pure than Difco, it would certainly benefit more from cleaning. I have only done the second protocol."  http://www.fgsc.net/neurosporaprotocols/How%20to%20wash%20agar.pdf -- Tom on the diybio google group

:"Soak agar shreds or granules in "several changes" of distilled water (DI).  Make a 4% gel, slice, dialyze or electrodialyze it, then use that to make a more dilute gel (no specified dilution) through reheating. Alternatively- dry and dissolve flakes later as needed.  Dissolve agar "in the solvent to be employed," and hot-filter through several layers of "lintless gauze, coarse filter paper, shredded paper or diatomaceous earth, or centrifuge at high speed (eg, 5000 g) for 10 mins in a rotor pre-heated to 80 C" (small volume technique: pull into 10 mL pipette with loose cotton plug. Remove plug and deliver to plate or slide).  Make agar gel from this, then chil, freeze, and thaw it to disrupt gel and "express the water and dissolved impurities." The reader is referred to Crowle 1961 (first edition of Immunodiffusion) for more detailed explanations."
::From Crowe's "Immunodiffusion," 2nd ed., 1973
:::-- AJ, diybio google group

:Preparation of agarose with cetylpyridinium chloride "or other tertiary ammonium compounds." 
::From Clausen in "Laboratory Techniques in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology" (volume 1, part 3, edited by Burdon and Knippenberg)
:::-- AJ, diybio google group

:"There was another text- it mostly consisted of making slabs of gel that are then allowed to sit in distilled water, which is changed every day for a week or more."
:: Maybe from "Handbook of Immunoprecipitation-in-Gel Techniques," edited by Axelson (1983). 
:::-- AJ, diybio google group



* Much of the above is distilled from the thread: [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/browse_thread/thread/3d7e7d6424e0d2a6/bbab3ffcb5b7913e agar purification recipes]

== Growth Mediums ==


:Making Bacteria Media from Potato. Many Excellent Media are Made from Plant Material. By Harold Eddleman, Ph. D.  We call the food for our microbes medium (plural = media). In the early days, only kitchen foods were available for microbiological media. Potato dextrose agar is the most widely used medium for growing fungi and bacteria which attack living plants or decay dead plant matter. This page suggests media that a student can make in his home lab from plant matter such as potato, tomato, flour, cabbage, ssuu. Many species of bacteria and fungi require vitamins or factors from plants. [...]  
:: http://www.disknet.com/indiana_biolab/b029.htm


== Staining DNA when performing Electrophoresis when using Agar/Agarose Gels ==

For DIY environments, staining DNA can be done with "GR Safe" or "SYBR Safe", both work well.  For other substitutions keep reading.

*'''Note: EtBr is not used in a DIY environment due to safety issues.'''

: "The shelf life (of GR Safe / SYBR Safe) is also longer than 6 months, provided you keep it in its container (out of the light!).  I've used tubes that were several years past their prime, with no problem." 
::--Kay Aull, diybio google group


=== Methylene Blue stain ===

Inexpensive, "harmless" dye.  Sold in pet stores, usually in the aquarium section.  Can also be found on ebay.


:"The disadvantage being, of course, that the resolution of Methylene Blue is pretty bad; you need a lot of DNA for it to show up. To a lesser extent, this is a problem for all alternative dyes" 
::-- Cathal Garvey, diybio google group


== How to Make Taq ==


:"Taq is super easy to purify, you don't need a column.   If you want Taq to use in PCR, you can just grow the plasmid with the DeltaTaq insert (available from ATCC), and heat the crude lysate. If you want to clean it up a bit more, for example for an enzymatic study, try this protocol: ''Rapid purification of high-activity Taq DNA polymerase Pluthero Nucl. Acids Res..1993; 21: 4850-4851''" 
::--Stacy, diybio google group


== Stains ==

The following are simple stains which can be used for microbes.

:"Gentian violet is easily had at drugstores as an antifungal." 
::--mlp, diybio google group

:"Eosin is OTC at any pharmacy." 
::--mlp, diybio google group



== Retrosynthesis: how do I synthesize this chemical compound? ==
Retrosynthetic analysis is a method of beginning with a target compound that you wish to synthesize, and working backwards from some otherwise ridiculously hideous and expensive compound, to more simple elements and compounds that you may be more likely to have available. In 1990, [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E.J._Corey E. J. Corey] won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work in [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Retrosynthetic_analysis retrosynthetic analysis]. While it is possible to manually generate a retrosynthesis tree, computational tools can assist in this laborious task. At the moment, however, there are no [http://fsf.org/ free software] tools for retrosynthesis. The pydaylight library is a wrapper to the Daylight toolkit and might serve as a good start. Please contact [http://heybryan.org/ Bryan Bishop] if you want to collaborate on this software.

= Are there any plans for a DIYbio-friendly, open source database system for biology protocols, how-tos and hardware/equipment construction? =

Creating a database/informational system for constructing equipment/manufacturing is a project [http://heybryan.org/ Bryan Bishop] is working on.

* [http://adl.serveftp.org/lab/presentations/updates-from-austin.pdf Updates from Austin, TX] related to diybio packaging standards (2009-08-13).
* [http://heybryan.org/om.html An index of threads related to open manufacturing] and standardized packaging of open source hardware projects
* [http://groups.google.com/group/openmanufacturing/msg/1fc4fbbfd4a6fb23 Recipe representation]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/browse_frm/thread/ada2289ebbc00fe0/6081750dd0eb5de1?lnk=gst&q=pcr.xml#6081750dd0eb5de1 Recipe representation as it concerns DIYbio]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/de9db7503c48c5c2 More on recipe representation] (especially re: an [[Open Thermocycler|open thermocycler project]])
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/ed52133e3c681100?dmode=source More on protocols and hardware packaging formats] (2009-04-15) (see also [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/4a7c4208682b9dfe?dmode=source Meredith's notes])



== Can the software tell me what equipment I need to run a particular experiment? ==


This is work in progress.  This is known as dependency checking.  The handy "checktools" program hopes to do this. ((Note: the idea here is that once the pcr.xml file makes a few friends with other protocols, software can then be written to extract a list of tools from the standardized protocol format. But this doesn't exist yet, since we only have "pcr.xml".))

= Keiki gels (gels-in-a-straw) MiniFAQ =
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/03a955483651a05c one of the original 'idea posts']
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/browse_frm/thread/c77e9e5290e57383/4ab47e86c1eecc56?#4ab47e86c1eecc56 Keiki gels: Gel electrophoreis in a straw] (it works!)
** [http://www.boingboing.net/2009/02/06/crowdsourced-science.html boingboing'd]
* [http://openwetware.org/wiki/DIYbio:Notebook/Keiki_Gels very basic protocol]

== Do all of the straws run at the same rate? ==
"I think the key there will be making sure that all the straws are exactly the same length -- each straw behaves like a resistor, so just like any other resistive material, a greater amount of material will mean a higher resistance (and thus lower current at constant voltage)." -- [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/09e4bcf12548501a Meredith]

== How do you stain the DNA in a straw? ==
"Easiest way to (stain the DNA) would be to use a stain that you add to the warm agarose before pouring, such as SYBR Safe or GR Safe (or ethidium bromide, but the cool kids don't use that anymore). I suppose you could slit the straw open with a razor blade if you wanted to use methylene blue, but that sounds like a huge pain." -- [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/09e4bcf12548501a Meredith]

= DIY Genetic engineering = 
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/browse_frm/thread/0bc28b8116eb254c# Basic questions on genetic engineering]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/284f254d52930b4c Notes on gene vectors and miRNAs (gene silencing)]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/35e5dce66a713308 Gene naming, homologous sequence similarity]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/7088d103c90e59c5 Genetic engineering (in general)]

== Discussion of Organisms for DIY Genetic Engineering ==

See the group discussions and the [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/web/diybio-model-organisms diybio model organisms] list. 

Candidates are:
*Psychomitrella patens (a moss that is naturally competent)
*Halobacterium  NRC1 (grows in very salty media)
*Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1


=== ADP1 ===

ADP1 has been considered a good candidate for DIY Genetic Engineering 
because it is naturally competent.

: "I developed ADP1 as a model organism for simple genetic engineering while at Scripps. The paper appears under my name in Nucleic Acids Research (5780¿5790 Nucleic Acids Research, 2004, Vol. 32, No. 19 doi:10.1093/nar/gkh881). When I did the work, ADP1 was considered A.  calcoaceticus, and was given a clean bill of health (biosafetly level 1). Later, to my dismay, it was collapsed into A. baylyi, grouping it with nasty pathogens and making it thereby less accessible. My interpretation: they probably are all the same species, technically, but Acinetobacter's predisposition for collecting genes from outside sources (which is exactly what makes it so useful - read the paper), led some strains to collect a bunch of virulence factors and become superbugs, like the ones that plague hospitals. If you can get some ADP1, I would consider it as safe as Ec K-12, but be very careful with less well-characterized strains of this species, because it can and will pick up genes that offer an adaptive advantage in it's environment, so you never know what a wild-type Acinetobacter might be capable of."
:: -- dmetzgar, diybio google group

= DNA synthesis MiniFAQ =
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/f2d636339a6e9c4d DIY DNA synthesis and bibliography]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/5f77c7fab381e5ed DLP projector based gene synthesizer proposal]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/6676a7ec80d37ef9 Some ranting notes on schemes for microfluidic DNA synthesizers]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/52b93a96a4927e45 Sequencing and synthesis predictions for 2010 from 2003]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/912e485da761b3c6 Synthesis of unnatural nucleic acids (like GNA)]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/70bea2b53b7716af Short bibliography of DIY-friendly DNA synthesis techniques]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/6feeeb29e4d5bc3a Notes towards DIY DNA synthesis and the synthesis of photolabile protecting groups from kitchen household products]
* [http://heybryan.org/books/papers/phosphoramidites/origin_of_oligonucleotide_impurities_and_errors.txt Origins of oligonucleotide impurities and errors]

== Can I order DNA over the internet? ==
mrgene, e-oligos, geneoracle, etc.

== What are oligonucleotides? ==
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oligonucleotides Wikipedia sez]: "An oligonucleotide is a short nucleic acid polymer, typically with twenty or fewer bases. Although they can be formed by bond cleavage of longer segments, they are now more commonly synthesized by polymerizing individual nucleotide precursors. Automated synthesizers allow the synthesis of oligonucleotides up to 160 to 200 bases. The length of the oligonucleotide is usually denoted by "mer" (from Greek meros, "part"). For example, a fragment of 25 bases would be called a 25-mer. Because oligonucleotides readily bind to their respective complementary nucleotide, they are often used as probes for detecting DNA or RNA. Examples of procedures that use oligonucleotides include DNA microarrays, Southern blots, ASO analysis, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), and the synthesis of artificial genes. Oligonucleotides composed of DNA (deoxyoligonucleotides) are often used in the polymerase chain reaction, a procedure that can greatly amplify almost any small piece of DNA. There, the oligonucleotide is referred to as a primer, allowing DNA polymerase to extend the oligonucleotide and replicate the complementary strand."

== How are oligonucleotides synthesized? ==

Oligonucleotide synthesis is done via a cycle of four chemical reactions that are repeated until all desired bases have been added:

*Step 1 - De-blocking (detritylation): The DMT is removed with an acid, such as [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trichloroacetic_acid TCA] ([http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/search/ProductDetail/SIAL/T4885 get it at Sigma-Aldrich]), and washed out, resulting in a free 5' hydroxyl group on the first base.
*Step 2 - Base condensation (coupling): A '''phosphoramidite nucleotide (or a mix)''' ([http://www.csun.edu/~hcbio027/biotechnology/lec3/pitt8.html struct], [http://www.bhk-lab.com/publications/2003/69.pdf synthesis of phosphoramidite building blocks] [pdf]) is activated by [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tetrazole tetrazole] ([http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/search/ProductDetail/FLUKA/88185 get]) which removes the iPr2N group on the phosphate group. After addition, the deprotected 5' OH of the first base and the phosphate of the second base react to join the two bases together in a [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphite phosphite] linkage. These reactions are not done in water but in [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tetrahydrofuran tetrahydrofuran] ([http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/search/ProductDetail/ALDRICH/494461 get]) or in [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dimethyl_sulfoxide DMSO] ([http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/search/ProductDetail/SIGMA/D2438 get]). Unbound base and by-products are washed out.
*Step 3 - Capping: About 1% of the 5' OH groups do not react with the new base and need to be blocked from further reaction to prevent the synthesis of oligonucleotides with an internal base deletion. This is done by adding a protective group in the form of [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetic_anhydride acetic anhydride] ([http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/search/ProductDetail/SIAL/539996 get]) and [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1-methylimidazole 1-methylimidazole] ([http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/search/ProductDetail/ALDRICH/336092 get])which react with the free 5' OH groups via [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetylation acetylation]. Excess reagents are washed out.
*Step 4 - Oxidation: The phosphite linkage between the first and second base needs to be stabilized by making the phosphate group pentavalent. This is achieved by adding iodine (go to local store) and water which leads to the [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oxidation oxidation] of the phosphite into [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phosphate phosphate]. This step can be substituted with a [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sulphorylation sulphorylation] step for [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thiophosphate_nucleotide thiophosphate nucleotides].


(Note: [http://biosupport.licor.com/docs/whatsnew/DNASynth800Phos.pdf this] might be a good document to see how phosphoramidites can be ordered from suppliers.) Here are some [http://www.protocol-online.org/prot/Molecular_Biology/Oligonucleotide/ oligo synth protocols in molecbio]. [http://www.protocol-online.org/cgi-bin/prot/view_cache.cgi?ID=2932 Quantifying oligos from phosphoramadite synth]. Note that you may not have to actually purchase phosphoramadites to start off with, but instead begin with a purified solution of nucleic acid??

== What are the origins of oligonucleotide impurities and errors? ==
See [http://heybryan.org/mediawiki/index.php/DNA_synthesis#Origin_of_oligonucleotide_impurities_and_errors here].



= Microfluidics MiniFAQ =

== What are microfluidics? ==
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microfluidics Wikipedia sez]: Microfluidics deals with the behavior, precise control and manipulation of fluids that are geometrically constrained to a small, typically sub-millimeter, scale. Typically, micro means one of the following features: small volumes(nl, pl, fl); small size; low energy consumption; effects of the micro domain (i.e., [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laminar_flow laminar flows], [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_tension surface tension], [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffusion diffusion], Marangoli forces, capillary forces, ...).

=== Even more on 'what are microfluidics' ===

See also: 
* [http://heybryan.org/mediawiki/index.php/Microfluidcs Microfluidics]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/1197606e3c3dc439 the original sharpie microfluidics post to diybio]
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/browse_frm/thread/b3bb2d8b8a654fd4/1197606e3c3dc439?#1197606e3c3dc439 the rest of the thread].
* [http://groups.google.com/group/diybio/msg/0e6ec2484dde6ea7 DIY microfluidics for continuous liquid flow using toner transfer (How To)]

== An example of microfluidics ==

The following is a run of the example microfluidics T-junction simulation in elmer, an open source CFD/FEM/FEA package. What you see here is the progression of an analyte due to electro-osmotic flow. There are two electric fields, three boundary conditions and a lot of wasted hours playing around with ElmerGUI and ElmerFront.

<youtube align="left">sPY84NelFO4</youtube> <html><div style="clear:both;"></div></html>



== What is a lab on a chip (LOC)? ==
A '''lab-on-a-chip (LOC)''' is a device that integrates one or several laboratory functions on a single chip of only millimeters to a few square centimeters in size. LOCs deal with the handling of extremely small fluid volumes down to less than pico liters. Lab-on-a-chip devices are a subset of MEMS devices and often indicated by "'''Micro Total Analysis Systems'''" ('''µTAS''') as well. Microfluidics is a broader term that describes also mechanical flow control devices like pumps and valves or sensors like flowmeters and viscometers. However, strictly regarded "Lab-on-a-Chip" indicates '''generally the scaling of single or multiple lab processes down to chip-format''', whereas "µTAS" is dedicated to the integration of the total sequence of lab processes to perform chemical analysis. The term "Lab-on-a-Chip" was introduced later on when it turned out that µTAS technologies were more widely applicable than only for analysis purposes.

Ultimately the idea is to have all of the typical components, procedures and processes of a laboratory available on a "chip", on a single perhaps disposable device, rather than having to build or purchase bulky equipment that sometimes tends to be hard to acquire or learn about.



= Appendix - List of Equipment Suppliers =

== New Equipment ==

* ''please expand this list''


=== In the United Kingdom ===

====Microscopy====

* Brunel Microscopes: http://www.brunelmicroscopes.co.uk/

Brunel Microscopes Ltd has many years professional experience in all aspects of microscopy and specimen preparation. They stock a wide range of light microscopes, stereomicroscopes, accessories, prepared slides, stains and reagents that are suited to the professional and amateur microscopist, as well as educational establishments, industry and research. 

* Used Microscopes UK: http://www.usedmicroscopes.co.uk/index.html

Used Microscopes UK is a Brunel Microscopes website dedicated to preowned microscopes, accessories and ex-demonstration equipment.

====Educational lab kits====

* National Centre for Biotechnology Education: http://www.ncbe.reading.ac.uk/menu.html

Since its establishment in 1984-5, the NCBE has gained an international reputation for the development of innovative educational resources.  The NCBE sells enzymes, microcentrifuges, pipettes, electrophoresis kits, transformers and other science kits.

=== In the United States of America ===

====Chemical Suppliers====

*  Chemsavers: http://www.chemsavers.com

From the website: "Chemsavers is a distributor of laboratory chemicals. We stock many different types of chemicals and often hard to find and one of a kind chemicals. We offer below retail prices and free shipping. How can we do this? We make special purchases on sale items, bulk items and close outs. As far as most of the basic lab chemicals go, we keep them in stock as we purchase directly from the manufacturers to increase the savings to you"

Their international shipping policies are not known.

*  The Lab Depot Inc: http://www.labdepotinc.com/

Cory Tobin notes: "Lab Depot sells pouches of pre-mixed TBE powder.  For $22.71 you get enough to make 1L of 10x TBE.  The usual working concentration of TBE is 1/2x, so this makes 20L of buffer.  They don't mention only shipping to academic/commercial addresses so I suppose they will send the stuff to your apartment."

====Culture Media====

* Sunrise Science Products: http://www.shop.sunrisescience.com

A recent question was asking where to find a supplier of amino acids for media. Sunrise Science Products (www.shop.sunrisescience.com) is good,          
primarily focused on basic yeast media. They also ship to residential addresses. Likely better purity than one would find at a GNC type store         
where there is no assurance of the actual content of any bottle.                                                                             
                                                     
====Educational and kit suppliers====

* American Science & Surplus: http://www.sciplus.com/

From the website : "Here at American Science & Surplus we are fascinated by discovery and invention. And we are dedicated to having fun along the way. We offer an eclectic range of products, many with a science or educational tilt to them, others simply handy or amusing. Value is important, and whenever we can, we carry surplus at prices well below retail. We love closeouts, inventory overruns, mis-manufactures, and items whose time has not come.

A word of caution: When a surplus item is gone, it is gone. So if you see something you love, best get it now since we may not have it tomorrow. When we can't find surplus, we may carry regular merchandise which we think those interested in learning and tinkering will find appealing, but only if we feel it is good quality at a fair price."

Note: does NOT ship outside of US territories

== Surplus/Auction Equipment ==

* [http://www.equipnet.com equipnet 
 
* ''please expand this list''


* LabX: http://labx.com/ 

LabX.com was founded in 1995 to provide a forum where buyers and sellers of new, used, surplus, and refurbished scientific and laboratory equipment could find items, negotiate terms, and complete transactions online.  LabX is a media service for the exchange of scientific equipment. We neither buy nor sell equipment, but rather provide a means for buyers and sellers to connect.

* Ebay and Ebay Healthcare, Lab and Life Sciences category: http://ebay.com/ 

EBay sells, just about everything - including lab equipment

* GOIndustry Dovebid http://www.go-dove.com/  
* GOBid Pharma http://www.go-dove.com/exchanges/default.asp?exchangeguid=05805e55-e7a6-4726-9756-3d9cbf876edc

GOIndustry auction off stuff when companies go under. They usually have at least one ongoing sale of both large and small equipment, benches & cabinets, and glassware. There are a few catches, though. You may have to pick the stuff up - they won't automatically ship it to you.
