{{DIYbio:Top}}
This topic ''DIYBio Projects'' is part of the 
[http://openwetware.org/wiki/DIYbio/FAQ DIYBio FAQ] 

: Please '''update this FAQ mercilessly with Q&A !'''

= Project Ideas =

The following are project ideas (brainstorming) which have been discussed on DIYbio google group.  Research papers or existing products similar to these ideas can be found, with the DIYbio aspect of lowering the cost, open sourcing the design, and allowing latest technology (such as USB or network, for electronics devices) to be added as enhancements.

* Using LEDs as spectrophotometer, colorimeter, etc.  Some projects already exist around the web.

* Using USB/networkable microcontrollers for thermocyclers.

* Printing or patterning various substances or microbes with inkjet printers.

* Making Taq

* Imaging system for Electrophoresis Agarose Gels (or Gel Box that includes the imaging system built-in)

* ''add your project ideas here''


= Open Source Gel Boxes =

== Gel Box 2.0 ==

Hosted on OpenWetWare, [http://openwetware.org/wiki/DIYbio:Notebook/Open_Gel_Box_2.0 Open Gel Box 2.0] is now available to buy; includes transilluminator.  Contact Tito.


== Electrophoresis Gel Box Power Supply ==

* See Open Gel Box 2.0 Power Supply on OpenWetWare.  Working unit has been constructed.


== 3D Printed Gel Boat and Comb Set ==

<pre>
To: DIYBio google group
From: Cathal <cathalgar...@gmail.com>
Date: Sep 17, 10:07 am

I've just published my first designs on Shapeways, for a $100 Gel Boat
and Comb set.
Sit these into a plastic container with some graphite electrodes at
either end, and you have a complete gel electrophoresis kit.
I intend to make more designs and share them both on this shop and
with the open-source community in the near future!

http://www.shapeways.com/shops/labsfromfabs

The designs are open source, and are available on Thingiverse.com for
those with access to a 3D printer.. just be sure and let me know the
results please! I'm awaiting my own 3D printer right now so I'm
itching to see results.

Note: Because of the opaque nature of the printed plastic, UV
visualisation will have to be Top-down.

</pre>

== Gel Box from Tupperware or other ==

* ''add your gel box project here''
