Overview
========

Molecular Manufacturing is the construction of atomically-precise macroscale
products. It does *not* require the manufacturing process to be
computer-controlled at every step or to handle atoms individually, nor does it
require the chemical processes to be limited to mechanosynthesis; only the
finished product must be machine-phase.

Molecular Manufacturing is often used a synonym of 'Molecular Nanotechnology',
the vision of nanotechnology started by Eric Drexler and further explored by
Ralph Merkle, Robert Freitas and Zyvex.. While Molecular Nanotechnology is
centered around a variety of (Diamond-based) molecular machines, from the
Drexler Arm (A setting in which one of these builds a copy of itself is pictured
below) to the Respirocyte to the Neon Pump, manufacturing is a more global
process, that concerns itself with such machines and with more global
objectives, such as cheap, distributed manufacturing technologies, which is why
'molecular manufacturing' is the preferred name for this article.

Nanotechnology, in general, is the art of building practical, complex machinery
with sizes varying from 100 to 1 nanometers. Nanoscience and nanotechnology are
new names for the gradually, naturally extended discipline of chemistry; and so
nanoscience should not be confused with the much more specific field of
Molecular Nanotechnology. The machines and processes shown in this article are
not filling journals or being made daily in laboratories.

How small are atoms really? Kenneth Ford says,

> ''"To arrive at the number of atoms in a cubic centimeter of water (a few
> drops), first cover the earth with airports, one against the other. Then go up
> a mile or so and build another solid layer of airports. Do this 100 million
> times. The last layer will have reached out to the sun and will contain some
> 1016 airports (ten million billion). The number of atoms in a few drops of
> water will be the number of airports filling up this substantial part of the
> solar system. If the airport construction rate were one million each second,
> the job could just have been finished in the known lifetime of the universe
> (something over ten billion years)."[^1]

History
=======

The origins of nanotechnology, whether 'normal nanotechnology' or Molecular
Nanotechnology, are often linked to Richard Feynman's historic 1959 lecture,
*There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom*, but the origins can be traced further
back. Colin Milburn in his book *Nanovision*, for example, correctly argues that
Feynman 'merely' articulated existing ideas in the science fiction of the time.

Feynman's path to nanotechnology consisted on having remotely controlled arms
building smaller ones, successively until the nanoscale. The closest parallel to
this idea is Robert Heinlein's 1942 *Waldo*, in which a homonymous robot does
this until its copies are small enough to perform sub-cellular surgery[^2]. A
coworker at Caltech's JPL, Al Hibbs, had read the story and even filed a patent
application for the use of waldoes in space exploration. He talked it over with
Feynman and 'delighted' him with the notion of miniature surgical robots.[^3]

Mechanosynthesis of Diamondoid
==============================

Mechanosynthesis is the synthesis of chemical structures catalyzed by mechanical
pressure and constraints, or, simply, the use of mechanical force to direct and
alter the course of chemical reactions. For example, the animations to the left
show a reversible mechanosynthethic reaction in which an acetylene dimer is
placed on a diamond C(100) surface and then removed, using an atomic force
microscope with a special tip geometry.

Mechanosynthesis of diamond, specifically, is the synthesis through this
mechanical chemistry of diamond, a stiff polycyclic structure.

The evidence for mechanosynthesis can be traced back to the historic 1989
spelling of the IBM logo using 35 Xenon atoms in a surface of Nickel by Don
Eigler and Erhard K. Schweizer. However, this experiment took place a few
degrees above absolute zero, and no covalent bonds were formed.

In 2003, Oyabu et al.[^4] first demonstrated mechanosynthesis on a Silicon
surface using an atomic force microscope to remove an atom from the surface,
then place it again on the same position, again at liquid helium temperatures.

References
==========

[^1]: Kenneth W. Ford, "The Large and the Small," in Timothy Ferris, ed., The
    World Treasury of Physics, Astronomy, and Mathematics (Boston: Little, Brown
    and Company, 1991), 22. First published in *Kenneth W. Ford, The World of
    Elementary Particles* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1958).

[^2]: *Waldo (short story)*. **Wikipedia**.
    [<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waldo_(short_story)#The_waldo> Link].

[^3]: Ed Regis. *Nano: The Emerging Science of Nanotechnology*. June
    1995.

[^4]: Noriaki Oyabu, Oscar Custance, Insook Yi, Yasuhiro Sugawara, Seizo
    Morita, “Mechanical vertical manipulation of selected single atoms
    by soft nanoindentation using near contact atomic force microscopy,”
    Phys. Rev. Lett. 90(2 May 2003):176102;
    [abstract](http://prl.aps.org/abstract/PRL/v90/i17/e176102), [APS
    story](http://physics.aps.org/story/v11/st19).
