# L29Ah's top priority interventions

All the interventions already exist and researched well enough to ascertain their net positive for longevity. Both lifespan and healthspan improvements belong.

The list is ordered subjectively by the "bang per buck" ratio. I'm open for additions, but keep the conflict resolution authority until we can agree how can something like this be pushed forward cooperatively without losing much utility for me.

<details><summary>skeleton</summary>
### Short intervention name

Long intervention description. Usually tells what specifically must be done, at what periodicity, intensity and so on, in a few sentences. ideally the description is enough to let people reproduce the intervention. All the following sections are optional, although "Why?" should always be filled.

<details><summary>Details</summary>
In case the intervention is too complicated, or otherwise has important notes, the exact details should go in this section.
</details>

<details><summary>Why?</summary>
Detailed description on why I think the intervention is effective and efficient, or at least a few links to the research.
</details>

<details><summary>Why not?</summary>
A few words on where the intervention may not be appropriate. Notable controversies, including research, belong here as well.
</details>
</details>


### Not doing stupid shit

Consuming ethanol, smoking, injecting questionable substances, engaging in extreme sports, getting in street fights, going to war, going to prison, not treating serious diseases. All of this reduces life expectancy a lot and has to go somewhere, and this is the catch-all for those things you can just avoid without facing a noticeable impact on your "life quality", while not being blatantly obvious like jumping off the roof.


### Eating the essential nutrients

I have [muesli](https://github.com/l29ah/muesli) devoted to this problem, although a bit outdated at this point. Not sure how to distinguish basic things like those 50-ish unquestionably-essential substances required by human metabolism and more niche yet still traditional and available things like caffeine and creatine, maybe they belong elsewhere.
TODO evaluate drinking


### High intensity decreasing interval training

Three times a week seems optimal.

<details><summary>Why?</summary>
[HIDIT is the most effective form of HIIT](https://hiitscience.com/perfect-workout-high-intensity-interval-duration/). HIIT is the most effective form of cardio exercise. Cardiovascular fitness is one of the best predictors of longevity.
[Longevity correlation](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3491006/)
</details>

<details><summary>Why not?</summary>
100 minutes a week could be spent elsewhere, can't really think much during sprints.
</details>


### Significant others

The social safety net virtually anyone can afford and enjoy.

<details><summary>Why?</summary>
[Correlated to long-term survival, especially in males](https://www.mdpi.com/2313-5778/9/4/104). Who is going to save your life after you get incapacitated at home? Who is going to criticize you for your stupid lifestyle choices you don't even remember making? Who is going to accompany you during your exercise?
</details>

<details><summary>Why not?</summary>
Could be a huge time/attention sink if inexperienced/done wrong.
</details>


### Avoiding atherosclerosis

Atherosclerosis is the single most deadly disease, directly claiming about a third of lives in USA and impairing lots of others. Most of the avoidance boils down to smarter eating and getting your energy intake in sync with your energy expenditure.

<details><summary>Details</summary>
[Prevention approach](https://myticker.com/)
</details>


### Avoiding type 2 diabetes

Metabolic syndrome also belongs here. Maybe should be merged with atherosclerosis? Probably eating too much bioavailable carbohydrates too quickly is not only overloading lipid-handling mechanisms but also other things.


### Healthy sleep


### Metformin

500 mg twice a day should do it.

<details><summary>Why?</summary>
[Effect estimation](https://gwern.net/longevity#benefit-1)
</details>

<details><summary>Why not?</summary>
Messes up inflammation.
</details>


### Beating herpesviridae

You're probably infected, and it is probably incurable, but can be beaten into submission. [List](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herpesviridae#Human_herpesvirus_types).

<details><summary>Why?</summary>
Having your neurons and immune cells intact helps a lot.
</details>
