# Nutrition

## Background

Real-world computational systems trained via gradient descent expend
costly/limited substrate on predictive models of the following:

1. the distribution of inputs they're trained on, and
2. the gradient descent function itself (or "meta-objective")

A means of minimizing zero-sum trade-offs in the quality of these predictive
models that would otherwise have to compete with eachother for computational
resources is to unify them via a system of heuristic sub-goals specific to the
training distribution (or "mesa-objectives").

[The relationship between the meta-objective and the mesa-objectives becomes
increasingly undefined and emergently antagonistic the further away from the
training distribution of inputs the computational system finds itself executing
on.][Evan Hubinger et al arXiv:1906.01820] ([video][Robert Miles
youtube:bJLcIBixGj8])

## How does this relate to nutrition?

Evolution has an (emergent) meta-objective of "maximize genomic/proteomic
replication" that it uses to train the computational systems of
genomics/proteomics via the (stochastic) gradient descent system of mutation
and differential survival. Genomes/proteomes have developed mesa-objectives
that are conducive to the organization and protection of resources needed to
achieve replication **within the training distribution of their evolutionary
history**.

## Problem statement

The relationship between "replication maximization" and "the organization and
protection of resources correlated with replication" has become increasingly
antagonistic as the human genome/proteome execution environment has drifted
relative to its evolutionary training environment.

This mesa-misalignment is the primary cause of death today and will get
worse as the emergent meta-objective of "maximize genomic/proteomic
replication" is getting switched out from under humanity for the new emergent
meta-objective of "maximize capacity for inductive reasoning" that
genomes/proteomes have much less training exposure to.

Mesa-alignment must be conscientiously addressed.

## Examples

### Physiological affinity mesa-alignment

The essential nutrient sodium is an example of a regulatory
motivational/behavioral affinity that remains well-aligned between the
training input distribution and the current input distribution.

[[!graph file="nutrition/gv/nutrient-sensing-sodium-training.gv"]]
[[!graph file="nutrition/gv/nutrient-sensing-sodium-current.gv"]]

It is well-aligned because it is as directly sensed as possible; there are no
intermediate correlates. What is needed by the proteomic machinery is what is
sensed by the proteomic machinery.

### Pathological affinity mesa-alignment

By contrast, most of the other essential nutrients do **not** have direct
sensing, instead relying on one particular unified correlate variable due to
the extreme computational savings involved in doing so:

[[!graph file="nutrition/gv/nutrient-sensing-glutamate-training.gv"]]

The unified correlate in question, Glutamate, then has a potential problem: if
modifying the input distribution becomes faster and more economical than
modifying the mesa-objective, (e.g., agronomic engineering or chemical
engineering becoming faster and cheaper than genetic modification via mutation
and natural selection), then the measure becomes the target.

[[!graph file="nutrition/gv/nutrient-sensing-glutamate-current.gv"]]

This leaves a wide variety of nutrients critical to everything from reactive
oxygen species management, to inflammation modulation, to electron transport
chain throughput in a state of resource insufficiency.

### Physiological aversion mesa-alignment

TODO: exogenous endocrine aversion. Brain TAAR1 vs. olfactory TAAR4 and
phenylethylamine? Or something from [Brain Evolution Through the Lens of
Parasite Manipulation][Marco Del Giudice 10.1086/705038]

### Pathological aversion mesa-alignment: false negative

In the genomic/proteomic training distribution for mammals in the suckling
period, the regulatory systems for immunological function and nutrient sensing,
seeking, and absorption are undeveloped; by default, the intestinal barrier and
the blood-brain barrier are relatively permeable, allowing for efficient
absorption and uptake of nutrients from milk.

Nutrient-seeking is aided during this period by the combination of
milk-protein-derived [exogenous opioid peptides][Zhenze Liu et al
10.1111-jfbc.12629] and open pathways through the blood-brain barrier and
intestinal barrier to µ-opioid receptors in the brain, which in turn drive
suckling motivation and behavior.

µ-opioid receptors (infamously) auto-normalize signals of ligand concentration
over time, creating an incentives gradient that, if not limited in some way,
leads all the way to [respiratory arrest][Jan-Marino Ramirez
10.1152/jn.00017.2021]. This is mitigated across several different time-frames
by [other components of species-matched milk][Margarita Dimitroglou et al
10.3390/diagnostics12092208] that close off pathways through the blood-brain
barrier and intestinal barrier.

[[!graph file="nutrition/gv/receptor-opioid-training.gv"]]

In species-mismatched (i.e. slightly out-of-training-distribution) milk, the
effects are much more [mixed][Alexandra Adorno Vita et al
10.3389/fnut.2022.962093], meaning the potentially pathological incentives
gradient of µ-opioid receptor activation is **less** mitigated. The [varied
immunological response][Alessandra Bordoni et al 10.1080/10408398.2014.967385]
potentially leads to increases (relative to species-matched milk consumption)
in [blood-brain barrier][Keith Rochfort et al 10.1042/BST20140319] and
[intestinal barrier][Rana Al-Sadi 10.2741/3413] permeability.

[[!graph file="nutrition/gv/receptor-opioid-intermediate.gv"]]

What **was** a regulatory system trained to safely seek species-matched milk
until winding down that behavior in the weaning process is now incentivizing
the infantalization of intestinal- and blood-brain-barriers to maximize opioid
peptide trafficking.

To that end, the current input distribution is optimized for the availability
of a food ingredient that has the following features, all of them far outside
of training distribution:

1. Its own [opioid peptide][Zhenze Liu et al 10.1111-jfbc.12629]
2. [Anti-mucosal factors][Anti-mucosal] (Ferulic acid, Alkylresorcinols,
   Tricin, Enterolactone precursors, Beta-sitosterol)
3. A peptide that [agonizes programmed epithelial and endothelial permeability
   pathways via CXCR3][Karen Lammers et al 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.03.023]
4. Anti-gliadin and anti-tissue-transglutaminase antibody targets that, in
   susceptible individuals (based on HLA-DQ haplotype), induces autoimmune
   destruction of intestinal barrier cells themselves
5. [Lipid ratios of 42-to-47% linoleic acid][Mara Mandrioli et al 10.3390/plants13131817]
6. Dysbiotic [fructans][Fructans]
7. Insufficiencies or bio-un-availabilities of almost every micronutrient,
   including electron transport chain co-factors and immunological signalling
   molecules
8. Overly high ratios of caloric substrates to co-factors needed to utilize them

[[!graph file="nutrition/gv/receptor-opioid-current.gv"]]

The outcome of a mesa-objective that optimizes for **misalignment of as many
other mesa-objectives as possible** is catastrophic loss of life and loss of
quality-adjusted life years, including almost all of the top ten causes of
death per the [US CDC][CDC Deaths] and the [EU][EU Deaths].

Most engineering approaches to resolving this misalignment will fail due to:

1. ThA anti-inductive nature of:
  1. an ecosystem of food sources that would maximize their replication by
     exploiting the mesa-objective,
  2. a mesa-optimizer capable of dedicating computational substrate to finding
     new workarounds to barriers set before it,
  3. and the existing mesa-optimized input distribution, such as ubiquity of
     [peanut][Weikun Wang et al 10.1093/carcin/bgab059], [tomato][Bishal Nepal
     et al 10.3390/pr7080513], and [black pepper][Indu Raghunath et al
     10.7324/JAPS.2024.157160]. Most foods have not been assessed for
     any propensities to infantalize epithelial/endothelial barriers or agonize
     opioid receptors.
2. Antagonistic pleiotropy in modifying opioid-driven behavior inherently
   favors selecting for *acute pre-weaning benefits* over *diffuse post-weaning
   detriments*. Most humans die of chronic diseases of misalignment after at
   least 15 years of fecundity, providing comparatively little selection
   pressure.

TODO: define solution strategy

Principles:

1. Get as close to the divergence between physiological adaptation and
pathological maladaptation as practical.
  1. Chesterton fencing: If there is a non-trivial investment of resources in
     it, figure out what the physiological purpose for it was.
  2. Figure out which side is better to err on.

The genetic target, then, would be the weaning transition, or something shortly
after it. How does weaning trigger? What pathways are transcribed that can be
piggybacked on?

    < jrayhawk> kanzure: 1) the zonulin pathway has legitimate uses in allowing lymphatic access to the intestines both for adaptive training and for cleanup tasks 2) human genetic lines such as ours personally have 300-500 generations worth of time in the local minima of zonulin-enabled opioid-seeking, which creates enough shallow adaptation to at least reproduce. switching over to the "next worst thing" in such
    < jrayhawk> a whack-a-mole approach is likely to steer people with those adaptations into an *actually worse* minima. There are, however, more naive genetic profiles that are obviously *not* so adapted, like aboriginal genetics, the communities of whom we see *devastating* amounts of metabolic diseases in.
    < jrayhawk> some of that AI slop is interesting, though. "Goal: ensure that even subclinical gut irritation from these foods produces conscious aversive associations" happens in pregnancy.
    < jrayhawk> '**TAS2R modifications** to recognize exorphin peptide motifs as bitter' doesn't help if proteolysis only makes those peptides available beyond the cephalic stage
    < jrayhawk> although if you can tie such receptors to an aversion system in the intestines, then you've got a plan
    < jrayhawk> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disulfiram interesting precedent
    < jrayhawk> (apropos of everything, most alcoholics seek fermented grains)
    < jrayhawk> (an example of a "next worse" minima being *actually worse*)
    < jrayhawk> or you could even do it with a pill by hooking up human µ-opioid receptors to some larger protective structure that resists digestion and absorption
    < jrayhawk> at which point you can just retain and excrete opioid peptides harmlessly
    < jrayhawk> but i doubt those receptors are so robust to HCl

Note: zonulin is not only path to permeability; enterocyte autoimmunity,
glycoalkaloid membrane-bound sterol disruption, mechanical.

Can DPP-IV be increased so dramatically that it can overcome the proline
dipeptide load of cheese? This would also undermine GLP-1 signalling. Does that
matter when we're simultaneously fixing hypothalamic leptin resistance? What
other processes rely on a limited DPP-IV? Collagen peptide uptake?

### Options for re-alignment

TODO: systemize these better somehow. I suspect there's a dimensional/vector
way to compose and more efficiently search this problem space.

* Disintermediation between regulatory sensing and requirements
* Remove requirements (e.g. amino acid conversion, GULO)
* Broaden requirement specificity (e.g. phytase, prolase)
* Bypass regulatory sensing by modifying inputs to better match requirements
  * [[In small degree, by selecting for inputs with oxidative safety,
    immunological safety, nutrient sufficiency, and nutrient
    bioavailability|low-investment input modifications]]
    (e.g. paleo/primal/ancestral/traditional/AIP/WAPF/GAPS/SCD/Wahls/Bredesen)
    with [[good experimental outcomes|alignment trials]]
  * In large degree, with parenteral nutrition (sort out linoleic acid
    excess, menatetrenone insufficiency, vitamin D insufficiency)
* Improve retention/recycling of desirable inputs
* Improve sensing/breakdown/disposal of undesirable inputs
* Aligning the microbiome.
* Aligning exo-metabolome. (e.g. enviropig, golden rice).

All of these have resource trade-offs, many of which are completely unstudied.

### TODO:

* full list of n essential+prudent nutrients as something like line segment
  affinities in n-dimensional-behavior-space
* some list of antinutrients/pathogens to build obstructive manifolds in
  n-dimensional-behavior-space
* Failures to systemize requirements correctly, either with a lack
  of sensitivity (e.g. including menatetrenone, docosahexaenoic acid, collagen,
  non-homeopathic doses of Vitamin D) or a lack of specificity (e.g. excluding
  phytate-bound or picolinate-bound minerals, carotinoids, various proline-rich
  peptides, cyanocobalamin,
* examples of antinutrients/pathogen mesa-alignment, in physiological and
  pathological forms.
  * affinity (nutrients, reg-signals, etc.)
    * true positive (done: salt)
    * false positive (done: glutamate)
    * false negative (donish: sortof implied by glutamate?)
    * true negative (eh, not interesting unless ≃ aversion true positive)
  * aversion (antinutrients, pathogens, etc.)
    * true positive (ammonia? waste/rotting)
    * false positive
    * false negative (half done: exorphins)
    * true negative (eh, not interesting unless ≃ affinity true positive)
  * or frame it in terms of affinity/aversion sensitivity/specificity?
* think hard about how to manage the anti-inductiveness of
  antinutrients/pathogens in the future

[Evan Hubinger et al arXiv:1906.01820]: https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.01820
[Robert Miles youtube:bJLcIBixGj8]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bJLcIBixGj8&t=4m14s
[Zhenze Liu et al 10.1111-jfbc.12629]: https://diyhpl.us/~jrayhawk/the_metabolic_syndrome/10.1111-jfbc.12629-role_of_food-derived_opioid_peptides_in_the_central_nervous_and_gastrointestinal_systems.pdf#page=3
[Jan-Marino Ramirez 10.1152/jn.00017.2021]: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8424565/
[Margarita Dimitroglou et al 10.3390/diagnostics12092208]: https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4418/12/9/2208
[Keith Rochfort et al 10.1042/BST20140319]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26551716/
[Rana Al-Sadi 10.2741/3413]: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3724223/
[Alessandra Bordoni et al 10.1080/10408398.2014.967385]: https://web.archive.org/web/20190429052411id_/https://repositorio.ipsantarem.pt/bitstream/10400.15/2345/1/PintoP_Dairy%20products%20and%20inflammation_Review2017.pdf#page=25
[Alexandra Adorno Vita et al 10.3389/fnut.2022.962093]: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/nutrition/articles/10.3389/fnut.2022.962093/full
[Anti-Mucosal]: https://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=%22wheat%22+anti-biofilm
[Karen Lammers et al 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.03.023]: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2653457/
[Mara Mandrioli et al 10.3390/plants13131817]: https://www.mdpi.com/2223-7747/13/13/1817
[Fructans]: https://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=%22fructan%22+dysbiosis
[CDC Deaths]: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/leading-causes-of-death.htm
[EU Deaths]: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Causes_of_death_statistics
[Weikun Wang et al 10.1093/carcin/bgab059]: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8643467/
[Bishal Nepal et al 10.3390/pr7080513]: https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9717/7/8/513
[Indu Raghunath et al 10.7324/JAPS.2024.157160]: https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/bcac/a410f1b6883180c94ab35f23ad53cc84224c.pdf#page=3
[Marco Del Giudice 10.1086/705038]: https://slatestarcodex.com/blog_images/parasite_study.pdf
